# Mandel's consolidation

A sample's dimensions are $-a \leq x \leq a$ and $-b \leq y \leq b$,
and it is in plane strain (no $z$ displacement).  It is squashed with
constant normal force by impermeable, frictionless plattens on its top
and bottom surfaces (at $y = \pm b$).  Fluid is allowed to leak out
from its sides (at $x = \pm a$), but all other surfaces are
impermeable.  This is called Mandel's problem and it is shown
graphically in []

The interesting feature of this problem (apart from that it can be
solved analytically) is that the porepressure in the sample's center
increases for a short time after application of the force.
This is because the leakage of the fluid from the sample's sides
causes an apparent softening of the material near those sides.  This
means stress concentrates towards the sample's center which causes an
increase in porepressure.  Of course, eventually the fluid totally
drains from the sample, and the porepressure is zero.  As the fluid
drains from the sample's sides the plattens move slowly towards each
other.


As is common in the literature, this is simulated by considering the
quarter-sample, $0\leq x \leq a$ and $0\leq y\leq b$, with
impermeable, roller BCs at $x=0$ and $y=0$ and $y=b$.  Porepressure is
fixed at zero on $x=a$.  Porepressure and displacement are initialised
to zero.  Then the top ($y=b$) is moved downwards with prescribed
velocity, so that the total force that is induced by this downwards
velocity is fixed.  The velocity is worked out by solving Mandel's
problem analytically, and the total force is monitored in the
simulation to check that it indeed remains constant.

The simulations in the PorousFlow test suite use 10 elements in the
$x$ direction and 1 in the $y$ direction.  Four types of simulation
are run:

1. FullSat.  This uses the FullySaturated versions of the fluid mass time derivative and the fluid flux.  In this case the Biot modulus is kept fixed, so it is expected to agree with the analytical solutions.

!listing examples/fixedStressMultiApp/mandel_master.i

!media media/mandel_results.png
  id=fig:mandelresults
  style=width:100%;
  caption= The horiztonal and vertical displacement and the pore pressure at different locations of the platten as a function of time.